Feature/2023 05 31 cloud kickstart componenets (#780)
ordina-jworks/ordina-jworks.github.io: _posts/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components.md

---
layout: post
authors: [gabriel_dela_peña, oumaima_zeraouili]
title: 'Cloud Kickstart Components'
image: /img/2023-05-17-kubecon-2023/banner-resized.jpg

> tags: [cloud, aws, internship, kubernetes, terraform, docker, aws services]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [cloud, aws, internship, kubernetes, terraform, docker]
```

category: Cloud
comments: true

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* [Docker](#docker)
* [GitHub Actions](#github-actions)
* [Amazon Web Services(AWS)](#aws)
* [Amazon ECR](#amazon-ecr)
* [Amazon EKS](#amazon-eks)
* [Amazon CloudWatch](#amazon-cloudwatch)
    * [CloudWatch Dashboard](#cloudwatch-dashboard)
    * [CloudWatch Logs](#cloudwatch-logs)
    * [CloudWatch Alarms](#cloudwatch-alarms)
    * [CloudWatch Container Insights](#cloudwatch-container-insights)

# Introduction

Introducing Cloud Kickstart Components: Simplifying Application Deployment on AWS (Internship Project)

We are excited to introduce Cloud Kickstart Components, an internship project aimed at simplifying the process of deploying applications on Amazon Web Services (AWS). As interns, we have developed a template that enables the automatic deployment of applications to AWS, harnessing the power of multiple AWS services effortlessly.

Our internship project focuses on automating the deployment process, eliminating the need for manual configurations and reducing the chances of errors. With this template, developers can seamlessly deploy their applications to AWS, allowing them to concentrate on their core application logic and development tasks.

> Through Cloud Kickstart Components, we provide an easy-to-use template that integrates with various AWS services, including EKS and ECR instances, Amazon CloudWatch, Amazon S3 for storage and Amazon IAM. This integration empowers developers to take advantage of multiple AWS services without the complexities of individual setup and configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through Cloud Kickstart Components, we provide an easy-to-use template that integrates with various AWS services, including EKS and ECR instances, Amazon CloudWatch, Amazon S3 for storage and Amazon IAM. This integration empowers developers to take advantage of multiple AWS services without individual setup and configuration complexities.	
```

# Architecture

> The first step in our deployment process is for the developer to push their code to the designated repository, such as GitHub. This ensures that the latest changes and updates are available for deployment. Once the code is pushed, our deployment pipeline kicks into action. The Spring Boot application is built, packaged, and transformed into a Docker image. This image encapsulates the application and its dependencies, making it portable and ready for deployment. The Docker image is then stored in a Docker registry, such as Docker Hub. This step ensures that the image is ready and available for deployment across different environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The first step in our deployment process is for the developer to push their code to the designated repository, such as GitHub. This ensures that the latest changes and updates are available for deployment. Once the code is pushed, our deployment pipeline kicks into action. The Spring Boot application is built, packaged, and transformed into a Docker image. This image encapsulates the application and its dependencies, making it portable and ready for deployment. The Docker image is then stored in a Docker registry, such as Docker Hub. This step ensures the image is prepared and available for deployment across different environments.
```

> We use the power of GitHub Actions, a workflow automation tool, to streamline the deployment process. Using predefined workflows, we configure GitHub Actions to automatically trigger the deployment process whenever there is a new Docker image available. GitHub Actions pulls the Docker image from the Docker registry, fetching the latest version of the Spring Boot application that was built in the previous steps. This ensures that the deployment uses the most up-to-date version of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the power of GitHub Actions, a workflow automation tool, to streamline the deployment process. Using predefined workflows, we configure GitHub Actions to automatically trigger the deployment process whenever a new Docker image is available. GitHub Actions pulls the Docker image from the registry, fetching the latest version of the Spring Boot application built in the previous steps. This ensures that the deployment uses the most up-to-date version of the application.
```

> With the Docker image available, we utilize AWS services to deploy the application. Depending on the specific requirements, it can automatically provision resources such as Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) instances, Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR), Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) buckets and many more. After deployment, we implement continuous monitoring and testing mechanisms using CloudWatch. We set up custom metrics, create dashboards for visualization, and define alarms to detect any anomalies or performance issues. Additionally, we leverage CloudWatch Logs to collect application logs for troubleshooting and analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the Docker image available, we utilize AWS services to deploy the application. Depending on the specific requirements, it can automatically provision resources such as Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) instances, Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR), Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) buckets and many more. After deployment, we implement continuous monitoring and testing mechanisms using CloudWatch. We set up custom metrics, create dashboards for visualization, and define alarms to detect anomalies or performance issues. Additionally, we leverage CloudWatch Logs to collect application logs for troubleshooting and analysis.
```

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

# Docker

> Docker Hub serves as a central repository that allows us to store, manage, and distribute our Docker images, while AWS provides the ideal platform for deploying and running our containerized applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker Hub is a central repository allowing us to store, manage, and distribute our Docker images. At the same time, AWS provides the ideal platform for deploying and running our containerized applications.
```

To begin the deployment process, we build and package our application code into a Docker image, encapsulating all the necessary dependencies and configurations. 
This Docker image acts as a self-contained unit, ensuring consistent deployment across various environments. We leverage the power of Docker Hub, a trusted and widely used container registry, to store and manage our Docker images. 

> By utilizing Docker Hub, we can easily version our images, making it simple to track and manage changes over time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By utilizing Docker Hub, we can easily version our images, making tracking and managing changes over time simple.
```

> This ensures that our Docker images are always up to date, incorporating the latest changes and enhancements. Once our Docker images are prepared on Docker Hub, we are ready to deploy them to AWS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that our Docker images are always up to date, incorporating the latest changes and enhancements. Once our Docker images are prepared on Docker Hub, we will deploy them to AWS.
```

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_1.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

# GitHub Actions

> We use the capabilities of GitHub Actions, a workflow automation tool. With GitHub Actions, we have automated various tasks, including deploying to Docker and seamlessly integrating our applications with multiple Amazon Web Services (AWS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the capabilities of GitHub Actions, a workflow automation tool. We have automated various tasks with GitHub Actions, including deploying to Docker and seamlessly integrating our applications with multiple Amazon Web Services (AWS).
```

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_2.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

One of the key benefits of GitHub Actions is its ability to automate the deployment of applications using Docker images. Using a simple configuration, we have set up workflows that automatically build our applications, package them into Docker images, and push those images to a Docker registry. 

> This automation saves us valuable time and effort, ensuring that our applications are always up to date and readily available for deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This automation saves us valuable time and effort, ensuring our applications are always up-to-date and readily available for deployment.
```

> This automation allows us to seamlessly deploy our applications, configure the necessary settings, and utilize the full capabilities of AWS without manual intervention. For example, when triggering a deployment workflow, GitHub Actions pulls the Docker image from the registry, distributes it to ECR and deploys it to an Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) cluster . Simultaneously, it can create S3 buckets for storage, create/add some CloudWatch metrics, set up the alarms and necessary permissions and configurations, all in an automated and reliable manner. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This automation allows us to seamlessly deploy our applications, configure the necessary settings, and utilize the full capabilities of AWS without manual intervention. For example, when triggering a deployment workflow, GitHub Actions pulls the Docker image from the registry, distributes it to ECR and deploys it to an Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) cluster. Simultaneously, it can create S3 buckets for storage, create/add some CloudWatch metrics, and set up the alarms and necessary permissions and configurations, all in an automated and reliable manner.
```

This level of automation significantly reduces the complexity and time required to deploy and integrate our applications with AWS services.

> In conclusion, GitHub Actions has become an invaluable tool for us, empowering us to automate the deployment to Docker and seamlessly utilize multiple AWS services. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In conclusion, GitHub Actions has become an invaluable tool, empowering us to automate the deployment to Docker and seamlessly utilize multiple AWS services.
```

# Amazon Web Services (AWS)

We have chosen Amazon Web Services (AWS) as our preferred cloud computing platform. With AWS, we have access to a comprehensive suite of cloud services that enable us to build, deploy, and manage our applications and infrastructure with flexibility, scalability, and reliability.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_3.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

By leveraging AWS as our cloud computing platform, we can take advantage of a vast array of services and features that enable us to build and scale our applications efficiently. 
The flexibility, scalability, and reliability of AWS empower us to focus on innovation and deliver exceptional experiences to our users while benefiting from the robust infrastructure and services provided by AWS.

# Amazon ECR

> We utilize AWS Elastic Container Registry (ECR) as a pivotal component in our deployment and containerization strategy. AWS ECR serves as a secure and fully managed container registry, enabling us to store, manage, and deploy container images effortlessly. With AWS ECR, we can securely store our Docker container images, ensuring their availability for deployment across various environments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We utilize AWS Elastic Container Registry (ECR) as a pivotal component in our deployment and containerization strategy. AWS ECR is a secure and fully managed container registry, enabling us to store, manage, and deploy container images effortlessly. With AWS ECR, we can securely store our Docker container images, ensuring their availability for deployment across various environments.
```

The integration of ECR within the AWS ecosystem allows us to seamlessly incorporate it into our deployment pipelines, simplifying the process of deploying containerized applications.

Moreover, AWS ECR provides powerful monitoring and management capabilities. We can track image usage, monitor repository activity, and gain insights into resource utilization through integration with AWS CloudWatch. 
This allows us to monitor the performance of our container images and repositories, enabling proactive management and optimization.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_4.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

# Amazon EKS

To deploy these containers effectively, we have adopted Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) from Amazon Web Services (AWS). 

> AWS EKS provides us with a robust and reliable platform to deploy, scale, and manage our containerized applications with ease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS EKS provides a robust and reliable platform to deploy, scale, and easily manage our containerized applications.
```

By consolidating logs in a single location, CloudWatch Logs simplifies the process of investigating issues and monitoring application behavior.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_7.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

As shown image above, different logs are being shown inside CloudWatch Logs. Every endpoints inside our application sends the following logs :
-	The log level
-	The message
-	The context
-	The sender
-	The IP address
-	The endpoint

Depending on the endpoint itself, the values are going to be different.

### 3. CloudWatch Alarms

One of the key features we leverage in AWS CloudWatch is the ability to set up custom alarms. These alarms enable us to define specific thresholds and conditions for our metrics. 
When a metric breaches a threshold for a specific timeframe or meets a predefined condition.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_8.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

> CloudWatch triggers an alarm, notifying us of any potential issues or deviations from expected behavior. This proactive monitoring approach empowers us to address potential problems before they impact our applications or services. In the example image above, the CPU usage is being monitored. The red line represents the upper limit of CPU usage, representing the maximum value that can be reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CloudWatch triggers an alarm, notifying us of potential issues or deviations from expected behavior. This proactive monitoring approach empowers us to address potential problems before they impact our applications or services. In the example image above, the CPU usage is being monitored. The red line represents the upper CPU usage limit, meaning the maximum value that can be reached.
```

### 4. CloudWatch Container Insights

Container Insights, powered by Amazon CloudWatch, offers real-time monitoring and deep visibility into the performance and health of your containers. By integrating Container Insights into our deployment template, we enable developers to gain valuable insights and make data-driven decisions to optimize their containerized applications. With Container Insights, you can effortlessly monitor crucial metrics such as CPU and memory utilization, network performance, disk I/O, and container-level resource allocation. This level of observability empowers you to identify performance bottlenecks, proactively troubleshoot issues, and optimize resource allocation for better efficiency . CloudWatch automatically collects metrics for many resources, such as CPU, memory, disk, and network, while Container Insights supports collecting metrics from clusters deployed on Fargate for both Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_10.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

For example, we utilize Container Insights to monitor our EKS cluster .

# Terraform

> In our project, we use the capabilities of Terraform to perform a wide range of tasks automatically. Terraform serves as a powerful infrastructure as code (IaC) tool that allows us to define, provision, and manage our project resources in a seamless and efficient manner. With Terraform, we can customize our infrastructure requirements and define them in a declarative configuration language. This enables us to specify the desired state of our infrastructure, including the resources, dependencies, and configurations needed for our project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our project, we use the capabilities of Terraform to perform a wide range of tasks automatically. Terraform is a powerful infrastructure as code (IaC) tool that allows us to define, provision, and manage our project resources seamlessly and efficiently. With Terraform, we can customize our infrastructure requirements and represent them in a declarative configuration language. This enables us to specify the desired state of our infrastructure, including the resources, dependencies, and configurations needed for our project.
```

One of the key advantages of using Terraform is its ability to automate the provisioning and management of resources across various cloud providers, including Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud Platform (GCP). This eliminates the need for manual interventions, reduces human error, and ensures consistent deployments across environments.

<img alt="architecture" src="{{ 'img/2023-05-31-cloud-kickstart-components/img_11.png' | prepend: site.baseurl }}"  style="margin:0px auto; max-width: 750px;">

> The code shown above, shows a snippet terraform code inside our project. This snippet code will configure the required provider and backend settings. It ensures that the project can interact with AWS resources using the specified provider and store the state of the infrastructure in an S3 bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code shown above shows a snippet of terraform code inside our project. This snippet code will configure the required provider and backend settings. It ensures that the project can interact with AWS resources using the specified provider and store the state of the infrastructure in an S3 bucket.
```

# Conclusion

> Our Cloud kickstart project has been an extraordinary journey, and we express deep appreciation for the exceptional support and guidance offered by our mentors, Pieter Vincken and Sigriet Van Breusegem. This experience has truly been transformative, allowing us to acquire invaluable knowledge and skills, significantly enhancing our proficiency in cloud computing and automation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our cloud kickstart project has been an extraordinary journey, and we express deep appreciation for the exceptional support and guidance offered by our mentors, Pieter Vincken and Sigriet Van Breusegem. This experience has truly been transformative, allowing us to acquire invaluable knowledge and skills, significantly enhancing our proficiency in cloud computing and automation.
```

Through this project, we have developed a comprehensive understanding of various aspects, including:

1. Cloud infrastructure and its intricacies.
2. Proficiency in working with Amazon Web Services (AWS), a leading cloud computing platform.
3. Extensive knowledge and hands-on experience with multiple AWS services, enabling us to leverage their full potential.
4. Mastery of Terraform, an essential tool for infrastructure automation and provisioning.

> 5. Expertise in automation techniques, empowering us to streamline and optimize various processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Expertise in automation techniques, empowering us to streamline and optimize various processes.
```
